Chapter 6 of Proverbs. King James Version. This LibriVox recording is in the public domain.
Recording by Michael Packard. My son, if thou be surety for thy friend, if thou hast stricken thy hand with a stranger,
thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, thou art taken with the words of thy mouth.
Do this now, my son, and deliver thyself. When thou art come into the hand of thy friend, go,
humble thyself, and make sure thy friend. Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids.
Deliver thyself as a roe from the hand of the hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the fowler.
Go to the aunt thou sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise. Which, having no guide, overseer, or ruler,
provideth her meat in the summer, and gathereth her food in the harvest. How long wilt thou sleep,
O sluggard? When wilt thou arise out of thy sleep? Yet a little sleep, a little slumber,
a little folding of the hands to sleep. So shall thy poverty come as one that travaileth,
and thy want as an armed man. A naughty person, a wicked man, walketh with a foward mouth. He
winketh with his eyes, he speaketh with his feet, he teacheth with his fingers. Fowardness is in his
calamity come suddenly. Suddenly shall he be broken without remedy. These six things doth the
Lord hate, yea, seven are an abomination unto him. A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed
innocent blood, and heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to
mischief, a false witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren.
My son, keep thy father's commandment, and forsake not the law of thy mother. Bind them
continually upon thine heart, and tie them about thy neck. When thou goest it shall lead thee,
when thou sleepest it shall keep thee, and when thou awakest it shall talk with thee. For the
commandment is a lamp, and the law is light, and reproofs of instruction are the way of life. To
keep thee from the evil woman, from the flattery of the tongue of a strange woman. Lest not after
her beauty in thine heart, neither let her take thee with her eyelids. For by means of a horish
woman a man is brought to a piece of bread, and the adulteress will hunt for the precious life.
Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned? Can one go upon hot coals, and his
feet not be burned? So he that goeth into his neighbor's wife, whosoever toucheth her, shall
not be innocent. Men do not despise a thief if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry.
But if he be found, he shall restore sevenfold, he shall give all the substance of his house.
But whoso committeth adultery with a woman lacketh understanding, he that doeth it destroyeth his
own soul. A wound and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away. For jealousy
is the rage of a man, therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance. He will not regard any
ransom, neither will he rest content, though thou givest many gifts.